Base-calling for Oxford Nanopore reads — Oxford Nanopore data has recently made its way to public
availability, and it’s very exciting! The reads generated by their MinION instrument have an average
length of thousands of base pairs. Unfortunately, these reads tend to have a significantly higher rate of
error than commonly used “short reads” (i.e. Illumina reads). Further, these errors tend to show up in
the form of indels (insertions or deletions in the read), which often makes mapping these reads very
difficult and results in a very low mapping rate for these reads.
Though there are likely many features contributing to the high error rate of these reads, one of them
is likely the method used for “base calling”. The “base-caller” is the piece of software that interprets
the “raw signal” of the sequencing machine and transforms this signal into a set of nucleotides, which
are then taken as the sequence of the read. In the case of Oxford Nanopore reads, the raw signal is
a time-varying signal representing the voltage across the pore, and an HMM model is used to map
this time-varying signal into the most likely sequence of nucleotides (hidden states) from which it was
generated. While this approach to base-calling is a reasonable one, significantly better approaches may
exist. For example, can we perform more accurate base-calling with a richer statistical model? What
if we attempt to model more hidden events (like skipping bases) which will affect the signal but do
not directly correspond to reading off a base? In similar tasks, such as non-segmented handwriting
recognition, different learning algorithms have been shown to outperform HMMs. What if we apply
other learning algorithms (e.g. support vector machines or recurrent neural networks) to the problem of
predicting the sequence of nucleotides from the signal? How much more mappable to Oxford Nanopore
reads become if we employ a better (but potentially more computationally intensive) base calling
methodology? If you can come up with something significantly better than the current approach, the
probability of turning this project into a publication is fairly high. You can obtain some publicly
available Oxford Nanopore data from http://gigadb.org/dataset/100102, and you can use Poretools
(https://github.com/arq5x/poretools), to process this data and get at the pre-base-called signal.
